In this lecture, we are going to start working on our next block.
In my browser.
I have a copy of the static version.
We are going to develop a team members block.
Clients will be able to add a list of team members.
Each team member will have a profile, picture, name, bio and links to their social media pages.
Interestingly, we are not going to be working on a single block.
Developing this type of UI will involve creating two blocks.
The first block will act as a container.
The second block will represent each team member.
If that doesn't make sense, it will.
During the plugins development, it's not uncommon to develop multiple blocks for creating a single
interface.
In fact, it can be easier to break a UI into multiple blocks.
By doing so, we can reduce clutter.
Let's try registering both blocks.
In the resource section of this lecture, I provide a link to a gist with the starter files for the
team members group.
BLOCK.
As usual, I want you to add these files to your project under a new directory called Team Members Group.
Pause the video and give it a try.
Welcome back.
I've added the files to my project in the source slash block's directory.
I have a new folder called Team Members Group.
Inside this folder, there are three new files.
Let's go through them.
The first file is called BLOCK JSON.
This file has the typical setup for a block.
The name of our block is called Team Members Group.
This block will act as a container for the team members.
Let's look at the attributes for this block.
We are storing two attributes called columns and image shape.
Designing blocks can be a challenge.
If you're designing nested blocks, things can become even more difficult.
A great approach to designing blocks is to ask yourself What responsibility should a block have?
By thinking about this question, you will be able to make decisions easier.
For example, let's think about our blocks attributes.
We're going to allow users to modify the columns in our block.
Clients can show between 2 to 4 members in a row.
Should this setting appear on the outer or inner block?
In my opinion, this attribute should appear on the outer block, aka the container.
This type of setting will affect the overall performance of the blocks.
It doesn't make sense to configure the columns of individual blocks.
There's another attribute for manipulating the image shape.
A single team member will have a profile picture.
Wouldn't it make sense to manipulate the image shape on each team member from a glance?
It does, however, what if the client has 20 team members?
They would need to modify the same setting 20 times for all members to have the same image shape by
adding this setting to the parent block.
The setting must be changed once we can pass on this setting to the children blocks.
On the other hand, nothing is stopping you from adding this setting to the individual blocks.
For this course, we are going to apply it from the parent block.
There's nothing else to say about the blocked JSON file.
Let's take a look at the index JS file.
I've provided a lot of code but nothing new to you.
Let's scroll to the edit function and the edit function.
We're extracting the image shape and column attributes.
These attributes will be useful later.
Inside the templates we're adding the inspector controls component for adding form controls to the sidebar.
The controls inside the sidebar will manipulate the columns and image shape.
Let's take a closer look for the columns.
We're adding a component called Range Control.
The Range Control Component adds a slider for changing a numeric value within a specific range.
Like most input components, we can add a label, set the current value and add an event listener for
updating the current value.
In this case, we're manipulating the columns attributes.
Clients will be able to change the number of columns within our block.
The component below this control is called Select Control.
It's a component we're already familiar with.
This component will manipulate the image shape.
We're going to provide three shapes.
You're more than welcome to add additional shapes.
If you decide to add more shapes, you will need to add CSS classes for them.
In a future lecture, we will discuss how the shapes can be applied to the image.
Let's scroll to the bottom of the file.
We will come across the save function.
It's been a while, but we are going to be using client side rendering for our block.
There isn't a reason to use server side rendering.
We aren't going to be relying on dynamic data.
It makes sense to use client side rendering.
The save function is very barebones.
I don't usually do this, but let's look at the main CSS file.
Most of the CSS is straightforward.
If you scroll through the file, I've added a section for adding styles to the editor.
I ran across some issues with getting the columns to work in the editor.
I've had to add better selectors.
You may run into the same problems, so feel free to steal these selectors for your project.
That's about it for this block.
We're not finished yet.
In the resource section of this lecture, I provide a link to the starter files for the team member
block.
As stated before, we are going to be creating two blocks for creating the UI.
In your project, create a new folder called Team Member.
The files from this gist should be created from within the new directory.
Pause the video and create the files.
Welcome back.
Let's review the files together.
There's not much to say about them.
There are dozens of lines of code, but nothing we haven't encountered before.
For example, the blocked JSON file has a few attributes.
There are more attributes than we're used to.
We're going to store the name, title, bio, social handles and image data of a member.
There's a lot of information to store, but the data itself is not complex.
Next, let's head down over to the index JS file.
Inside this file we have the edit and save functions.
We do not need a server to render this UI inside the edit function.
The block will have a control in the sidebar for editing the images alt attributes, the blocks name
or render the name title, image, bio and social handles.
The name, title and bio attributes will be modifiable via the rich text component.
I prepared this component for these locations.
Our focus is going to be on allowing clients to modify their image and social media handles on our blocks
already.
The next step is to register them.
Open the register block.
Start php file.
At the bottom of the block's array.
Add two arrays for the team members, group and team member blocks.
Neither block needs an options array.
Let's try using these blocks.
I'm going to open the experimental page in the Gutenberg Editor.
If you have blocks from previous sections, you can safely remove them after doing so.
Try adding the team member blocks to the page.
You may not see anything for the team members.
BLOCK It's not going to produce content.
The job of this block is to be a container for the team member block.
Regardless, you should be able to add the block to the page.
If Gutenberg can add the blocks to the page, we can move on to working on the blocks.